one of the things my girlfriend and I
really have in common is that we were
deeply uncomfortable with and really
rejected the culture we happen to be
born into and the cultures were born
into or on opposite sides of a border
but are very very similar
so my girlfriend is from Detroit
Michigan and I'm originally from Toronto
Canada now the United States is a huge
country if my girlfriend had grown up in
Texas different kind of thing but
Detroit and Toronto we really come from
a similar background and what makes it
deeper is that we both really rejected
and profoundly uncomfortable with that
cultural background let me ask you a
question
why was my own father
a Canadian nationalist why did he like
and support Canada so much and if I had
been born into some of the advantages in
life would my fealty have been kind of
bought and sold would I have been way
more positive about Canada or would you
have been more positive about Detroit so
here's what here's what raised that
question for me I found a really strange
quotation from my father and I was from
1967 I stayed okay so how old how old
was my father in 1967 when he said this
okay from a little biography newspaper
article but my father it says in 1967 he
was chose to curate the history of
painting and Canada exhibition at Expo
67 so Expo is an international it's paid
for by the Canadian government the Party
supported international exhibition by
then he had already been a curator at
the Vancouver Art Gallery and the new
brunswick museum and sejong my father
had nothing but a BA those opportunities
don't exist for our generation people
with nothing but a BA he had this SAP
and a BA in philosophy not even a BA in
our history or NHANES he had a fabulous
career handed to him by the Canadian
establishment despite the fact that he
was a communist despite the fact that he
was an eccentric in so many obvious ways
he had opportunity after to opportunity
handed to him and of course you know the
world was a different place economically
as well as politically in the 1960s
right now he was only 28 years old at
that
my girlfriend's 26 he'd already had this
fabulous career from the minute he
finished his BA right now I mean my
my mother was earning money in
architecture in a fabulous wage she was
earning money writing for one of the
biggest newspapers in Canada I guess
around the time she finished high school
but while she was a university student
you know she was getting paid real money
to go in and write articles for a
newspaper again it's not it's not gonna
happen today so look I mean not it not
at 26 not at 28 not at 36 not at 38 yeah
but I mean this is my point I mean in a
sense success can be corrosive failure
can be corrosive to I really had to ask
myself when I lived in a communist
country when I lived in Laos
because Laos did hand me certain
opportunities a certain level of comfort
Laos by the way it was a grimy
third-world country at that time when I
arrived there were there was literally
not a single ATM in the whole country
not a single cash machine like the the
level of technology and comfort by first
world standards was low it was tough
there were stray dogs in the street
everywhere he can attack by dogs but
that aside nevertheless okay I was in a
situation in Laos or it's like if I sell
out if I just become pro-government and
pro-establishment within the
tiny third-world country I can have a
certain level of income and a certain
quality of life in a certain level of
privilege and I've probably told you
this at one point my boss who was a
government official a Communist Party
official he he said to me like look if
you stick with this program to some
extent you're above the law like don't
don't worry about it you know you know
even like and he was saying it because
the police would take people in and
interrogate them to get bribes out of
them or something
look look even if you're put in prison
like we'll get you out kind of thing and
you're above the law here okay um but
like I remember thinking like no like
even if they paid me ten times as much
or hundred times like even if this was
real money even if this was real luxury
like I could never I could never be kind
of a pro I I can't be a pro
establishment person I can't be a
nationalist for a louse even reported
that way more vaguely and I I felt I
couldn't be for any country like maybe
even if you imagine like a Dubai or
something I know a lot of white guys go
to Dubai teach English or get a position
get it get a get a good career going but
I felt for me that was because like my
capacity to be a conformist was already
shattered by the negative experience of
Canada you know what I mean like my
experience in Canada is so negative it
didn't just turn me against being a
conformist and national speak for
establishment Canada but it kind of
soured me on that or made it impossible
for me to conform anywhere in Laos or in
Dubai you know and maybe maybe I'm wrong
right but like my point is for people
like my father and it's it's got to be
true for some people in current
generation I think it's true you see I
don't know if you don't need these guys
do you know any young white man who
became like successful computer
programmers at an early age back during
the tech boom you know what I mean like
like you know what I mean like they
maybe they just finished high school and
then went straight into doing computer
programming and making a lot of money or
maybe a lot of time it's like they did
to you
of university but then they were making
so much money in computer programming or
or making websites for the internet you
know what I only met a couple times had
no university education but he has been
able to you know he didn't have an easy
life he initially was working as a chef
for many years and then he got into
computer programming and he made some I
don't even know what it was but he made
something that earned him a ton of money
and he was able to buy this nice place
in Florida and basically have an early
retirement and he's just living off of
those savings so yeah and in effect he
he got lucky
what right at the time yeah the time
that he got involved in what program he
created so yeah you know I just I think
so I'm especially if that kind of
success comes young I think a lot of the
time that fosters pro-establishment Pro
conformist attitudes whether or not
they're nationalist attitudes we're like
I mean this is all it is ultimately this
shallow it creates the feeling that this
whole society is working because it's
working for you because it's giving
positive opportunities for you yeah yeah
so I don't know if he was like that I
don't know the economic opportunities
for my own father also have made him
feel this way but he recognizes how
difficult it is for people my age you
know neither of my brothers stayed in it
this is Detroit so just to be clear this
is Detroit is economic disaster I mean
it's especially tough food truck yet
yeah neither of my brothers were able
they didn't want to stay in Michigan
there were no opportunities so of course
they moved all the way across Missouri
because of this even though they had
very marketable degrees so you know III
think he realizes the devastation of
this actual city and also around the
country in in
the areas surrounding Detroit as well
yes a lot of lost economic vibrancy yeah
um how that impacts everything how its I
mean maybe my mind is just on this for
whatever reason but I mean you know many
of my my father's friends graduated from
high school and were able to get married
have kids and have owned a home owned a
home stay job then you know you were
able to have start this life right out
of high school I mean it's it's
something that my generation didn't have
for my father's generation specifically
University tuition not even $500 future
transcripts you know there are seeds
from my my mom got an education at the
same University I want to yeah oh so
much cheaper it had it had gone up by
like 40 times basically you know like
well wait there's the cost but then
there's the value of the diploma when
you finished it I mean so for my father
in the 1960s having a BA actually opened
doors for him and for me you know any
job I thought oh you have a bachelor's
degree and and what you know it's it's
now right in order to get a terrible job
yeah I'm not even a job you know anyway
yeah I didn't I do I do have
extraordinary things about me yes but in
Canada there's certainly no no
opportunity for me but look you don't I
feel what dis satisfies me about Canada
politically and culturally is profound
and important and real I don't feel that
it's in any way like resentment over the
fact that I didn't have the kinds of
opportunities my father had right but
like in a sense what I'm doing here is
challenging myself because I'm also
acknowledging like okay well what if
Canadian Society or any society offered
me the kind of unbelievable upward
social mobility my father was offered we
usually also includes elements like a
home you know education social status
income
homeownership you know it's a joke today
even if you're really quite successful
as a young person living in Vancouver
today is an exam for income it's just
gonna go into rent you're gonna be a
rent slave your whole life even if you
really up quite a good job let's let's
say you become a dental hygienist
you know it's a high-paid job boring
repetitive job yeah what do you think
you can buy a house in Vancouver buy a
condo in Vancouver maybe you know
anyways you know life long your only
priority you know whatever you know so I
mean the problem here isn't really
poverty the problem is opportunity and
and lack of opportunity but like what
I'm saying and challenging myself and
challenging the audience is to what
extent you know to what extent do you
feel your critique of the society you're
born into or even the society you choose
to move to to what extent is that really
motivated by a kind of resentment and
hopelessness or or or the opposite or or
opportunity and hope that you happen to
have handed to you by these by these
circumstances just want to Stevens on
one second so you know my my ex-wife's
father he was part of this golden
generation of computer programmers where
nobody needed a bachelor's degree there
was so much demand there were so few
people who were competent at doing
computer programming that whatever
straight out of high school all kinds of
people were more successful made a lot
of money and I had one friend who was
really in the last period what we
normally call kind of the internet boom
the last period where people get ahead
with no no BA and and really make a lot
of money and then I saw that I saw that
disappear where those and with both so
with all those people my ex-wife's
father and this young man I met in Asia
so he was a young white guy from
Australia and he got money
fast without getting a BA and he started
getting corrupted by the lifestyle that
he could afford himself as a computer
programmer traveling around Asia where
the cost of living was even lower so
he's earning Australian dollars and he's
vacationing in the Philippines and
Thailand and then China China became
more and more part of his life I mean
look it's so fundamentally stupid to say
well I own a gold mine I'm making lots
of money so all of society is doing fine
the system works and like you know
obviously I'm using the gold mine as a
ridiculous example it's true when I
lived in Laos by the way the the single
biggest company the single biggest
employer was literally a gold mine the
economy really the economy really hinged
on this one company doing coal mining
some people aren't literally gold miners
or investors and executives and Goldman
kept so it's a real example but what a
ridiculous delusion to think this
society works or this nation is good or
to have these other things Israel and
likewise I mean the thing is computer
programming is like a gold mine in one
sense in that there's there's this
fleeting period of opportunity that gold
mine in Laos there's no five good years
and guess what you run out of gold gold
there was this period of time when there
was easy money in computer programming
and you know it's if you talk to young
people in computer program today even a
Silicon Valley and stuff it's like well
you know it's not minimum wage but no
one would say today it's it's an easy
way to make a living so what so now now
that the gold is gone with the comb so
now do you sympathize with the people
who are literally on the street of the
people who are strong in a survivor say
now do you have some kind of criticism
of society and again a lot of this comes
back to the educational establishment
people bankrupting themselves to get a
bachelor's degree and then doing what
after that you know I look I I have the
delusion that my my critique of Canadian
society is not based on that kind of
personal economic
perspective or experience III think it's
real but you know I also have that
delusion as you know this is something
that we connect on there are reasons why
the economic opportunities aren't so so
great and you know we're at where I grew
up but part of it is North America was
this land of opportunity for colonists
and you got to see how like the culture
there's so many things that I don't like
about American culture but part of it is
that it's a result of colonization like
you know you've talked about as we've
been going around Taiwan how the actual
buildings were put up with such speed
and you know they wanted to build as
fast as possible we just went to the
port city of Geelong and you know got to
see how it's been run down after you
know this initial period of economic
opportunity and optimism and that to me
mirrors you know Detroit and many of the
surrounding City owes maybe maybe like
Columbus or you know different places in
Ohio Illinois you know at one point
these tons of structures were put up and
oh there's gonna be so much opportunity
here and in the Detroit area it's good
with car manufacturing now that that's
no longer something that's no longer an
actual opportunity what is there you
know it's it's like you say with the
with the Gold Line there was this rush
this gold rush in Detroit and then now
there's what what is there to hold on to
and you know I remember we we had this
discussion
sorry-sorry I found you know
just trying to form my thoughts here but
when we were in Brussels you know I
remember we were walking around he were
talking about Europeans tend to be more
like care about their hometown and you
know you're making this connection
between like Europeans who even though
their hometown isn't you know a very
economically vital place they still feel
some connection to it like this is
actually my ancestral home this is what
I want to hold on to and you know
maintain the traditions of but what is
what is there in Michigan for my family
I mean as soon as the factory closes or
something what are you trying to build
there what's the connection there was an
economic opportunity
but then when that's gone what's the
meaningful connection what is it you're
trying to build in that time unlike
someone whose whole family is from a
certain town in Switzerland or Iceland
like hey we have a thousand years of
heritage here and we're trying to build
on it right great grandparents grew up
well my great grandparents across the
ocean and in Norway England Germany I
mean what connection do I really have to
Michigan other than similar climate
similar krabi climate in some places
that my you know relatives were from so
yeah I mean you don't have this this
deep connection to the land unlike I
mean or any institutions or something
that's because I know the reason why I'm
there is because of you know this
opportunity from wiping out the native
people I mean the native people actually
have this connection to their land and
it's now gone because it's all been
ruined by white people coming in and
changing the landscape completely
changing the you know natural landscape
- it's not just it's not just cities
going up it's like deforestation
changing of actual waterways and how
dams and so so yeah yeah I mean I'm just
kind of saying like what is there um
holding people to North America know if
it's not a NASA ancestral homeland if
there's no real life if if the gold mine
has been deprived or depleted of its
gold yeah what is there now well so I
just say we can Melissa and I have all
this stuff in common but Toronto
downtown Tehran I didn't come from one
the suburbs like I was walking distance
from the banking districts I was really
down I was walking distance from
Parliament and the University campus I
walked everywhere dented Ron I'm not
from the suburbs in downtown Toronto
everyone was just there to make money
and get out you know and like you felt
like you were in a place that had this
kind of merely economically instrumental
value that it had no meaning in itself
and on the country was very common to
hear people say about Toronto you know
they were gonna move they were gonna get
out as soon as they could they were
gonna move back to Whistler British
Columbia or the East Coast like you know
as soon as they get this money they're
out cuz in interesting I don't know if
people still feel that way what's wrong
today but it was seen as this kind of
dark bleak awful city gets your money to
get home and anyway regardless of it
whether or not individuals feel that way
about Detroit so look right now we're
having this conversation in Taiwan and
Taiwan is basically in a period of
economic boom there's basically zero
unemployment here we're in an
industrious steel manufacturing town
we're actually in an industrial district
we walk past huge factories and
smokestacks every day here this is the
opposite extreme from Detroit Detroit is
a landscape of empty and abandoned
factories and this is you know this this
is a this is an economically and
industrially booming place and Taiwan I
mean this is more parallel to what I was
saying about last before it offers you
Melissa you know a certain level of you
know economic yeah okay that's a good
way to put it offers you a middle-class
quality of life if you'll just sign up
for it if you'll just conform
um I mean again we're both both just
kind of too old to get swept up in this
girl into 26 thank you it's really not
everyone thinks my girlfriend's young
compared to me but 26 is already old
she's already burdened with a lot of the
you know sorrows of life but you know
we're not swept up in this like Oh Tom
Juan's the most wonderful place or
something we're not becoming
nationalists or enthusiasts or
uncritical supporters of Taiwan just
because it offers us that and I think
we're both very skeptical about the
nature of the opportunity and we're both
skeptical about what we'll lose if we
sell out and take that opportunity and
commit to it you know but no one's
offering me a position as a as a [ __ ]
museum curator these were really elite
positions being offered my father we'd
he had nothing but a BA in philosophy
and he published insane articles in
communist magazines and newspaper me no
I'm sorry I was just looking it up but
stuffs on the internet now log has been
digitized whoa you know the the the
level of privilege and opportunity that
was handed him and you know he was he
was offered you know scholarships get a
PhD and all this stuff
he's offered all these these
opportunities as a young man that he
very much took for granted and in some
ways of course in his own mind he
thought you know he became a rebel you
know as a as a communist extremist he
thought of himself as a revolutionary um
so many ways he sold out I mean he
absolutely became part of the Canadian
establishment not even the middle class
establishment I've been stretching the
middle class here um you get part of the
upper-middle class now shall we say and
he really did become a nationalist and
this kind of Pro Canadian demagogue and
so on that's that's what he was he was
all about so look I mean that's it that
this video is already going on long
enough I mean for me it's just a
reminder about the riddle of how
Economic Opportunity and you know maybe
resent
about lack of Economic Opportunity can
be profoundly linked to what you
perceive as you know your political
identity um and the ethical objections
and the ethical motivations that shape
your political today